..
   Athena document is copyright 2016 Bruce Ravel and released under
   The Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/

.. _short_sec:

Data measured over a very short energy range
============================================

When measuring XANES data, the experimenter might be tempted to
severely restrict the range of the measurement to a narrow span just
around the edge energy.  For example, the short span of the red trace
in :numref:`Fig. %s <fig-bkg_short>` includes the three small peaks in
the edge that positively identify the species as FeS\ :sub:`2`.
Shouldn't it then be sufficient just to measure that short data range?

.. _fig-bkg_short:
.. figure:: ../../_images/bkg_short.png
   :target: ../_images/bkg_short.png
   :align: center

   Data on FeS\ :sub:`2` truncated to the region just around the edge.

In a certain sense, the answer to that question might be
:quoted:`yes`.  If the whole purpose of the measurement is to be a
fingerprinting exercise |nd| is this sample FeS\ :sub:`2` or is it
something else?  |nd| then the data measured over that very short
energy might might be adequate.  However, XANES data are used for lots
of things other than mere fingerprinting.

Any quantitative interpretation of the XANES data, for example `linear
combination fitting <../analysis/lcf.html>`__ or `principle
components analysis <../analysis/pca.html>`__, requires that the data
be normalized in a sensible, defensible, reproducible manner.  Without
access to the full data range, it is very difficult to a good job of
normalizing the short-range XANES data.

This is easy to see with this example.  Because the data are truncated
somewhere in the midst of the first big oscillation after the edge, it
is basically impossible to know where the `post-edge line
<../bkg/norm.html#the-normalization-algorithm>`_ should go.  There
simply isn't enough data to establish the trend that the post-edge
line is designed to follow.  Without that information, the value of
the edge step cannot be determined accurately, possibly resulting in a
very large systematic uncertainty in the edge-step normalization
parameter.  This large uncertainty would then have a significant
impact on any quantitative analysis attempted using these data.

Severely restricting the pre-edge region can have a similar impact on
the normalization.  Although this example has enough of the pre-edge
region to do a reasonable job with the `pre-edge line
<../bkg/norm.html#the-normalization-algorithm>`_, that would not be
true if it were much shorter.

It is for this reason that **good experimental practice** is to
measure a reasonable amount of data both before and after the edge.
Even for a XANES study, it is a good idea to measure at least 100 eV
before the edge and at least 300 eV after.  If you are very concerned
with time, you can consider measuring very sparsely outside the edge
region.  With even as few as 10 points in the post-edge region, it
becomes possible to normalize the red trace in :numref:`Fig. %s
<fig-bkg_short>` in a reliable fashion.


Note, though, that the advice on data range depends on the situation.
In :numref:`Fig. %s <fig-bkg_ok>`, we see oxygen K-edge data measured
on CaTiO\ :sub:`3`.  The EXAFS is often weak in data measured on low
energy edges.  In this case a reasonable normalization is possible
even though the data only extend about 90 eV above the edge.  Even so,
another few widely-spaced data points would have made it much easier
to reliable process these data.

.. _fig-bkg_ok:
.. figure:: ../../_images/bkg_ok.png
   :target: ../_images/bkg_ok.png
   :align: center

   Oxygen K-edge Data on CaTiO\ :sub:`3` measured at a soft x-ray
   beamline. 


In some situations, the MBACK algorithm might help normalize short
data in a sensible manner.  But even that algorithm is not completely
stable with respect to such a short data range.  MBACK is `implemented
in Larch
<http://xraypy.github.io/xraylarch/xafs/preedge.html#the-mback-algorithm>`_
but is not at this time available in :demeter:`athena`.

.. bibliography:: ../athena.bib
   :filter: author % "Weng"
   :list: bullet

